[Music]
when you start that reflective
self-inquiry
ask yourself who am i what do i want
what is my purpose what am i grateful
for
going to the stillness of meditation you
have what wisdom traditions have called
revelation
revealed truth
now you know that sounds very grand i
would say just call it insight
meditation mindfulness awareness of body
awareness of mind awareness of mental
space awareness of the web of
relationship awareness with that which
we call the universe
it leads you ultimately
to the awareness of awareness
and when you discover that
that's nirvana
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is a multiple time new
york times best-selling author
practicing medical doctor and
world-renowned pioneer in integrative
medicine and personal transformation one
of the most widely recognized luminaries
in the field of human spirituality he
has written an absolutely staggering 90
books and he shows no signs of stopping
often working on multiple books at the
same time he's the founder of the
incredibly active non-profit the chopra
foundation which conducts wide scale
research into human well-being and he's
the founder of chopra global a modern
day health company at the intersection
of science and spirituality he's also a
clinical professor of family medicine
and public health at the university of
san diego and he teaches meditation all
over the world including at his own
meditation center demonstrating his
unprecedented reach he's created
meditation retreats with oprah and
shared the stage with the dalai lama and
countless other eminent leaders in the
space
oprah said of him that he is a man who
invites you to see deeper into your own
soul so please help me in welcoming the
man that time magazine named as one of
the top 100 heroes and icons of the
century the author of the national
bestseller metahuman unleashing your
infinite potential the one and i assure
you only deepak chopra
[Applause]
it is so good to have you thank you
thank you
thanks for having me
so thank you so much for joining me um
i've had the good fortune of actually
sitting in the audience when you were
doing one of your guided meditations
meditation is something that completely
changed my life
what i love about your story though is
that you took a pretty
weird route to getting where you are now
and i'd love to walk through some of
that because you started as a pretty
straightforward medical doctor what was
that like when did you begin to think
that there might be something more
so i took my training in internal
medicine
i got board certified in it and then i
went on to
train in something called endocrinology
which is the study of hormones
and then in neuroendocrinology which is
actually brain chemistry
and when i was training this is in the
70s in the mid 70s
we had a new technique called radio
immunoassay just been discovered
the people who actually created the
technique were won nobel prize in
medicine rosalind yellow was the
scientist i remember you could measure
for the first time
chemicals
they're called peptides
in the brain
and what i immediately recognized
with the help of my colleagues was that
brain chemistry was the clue to the
connection between what was happening in
your inner life and what is happening in
your
body
these chemicals
called neuropeptides neuro means in the
brain
peptides their proteins
and they're actually the molecules of
emotion
serotonin dopamine oxytocin opiates
people are addicted to opiates these
days
but you make your own opiates too
and so
in fact once we started looking at these
chemicals we realized that they were
also
immunomodulators the modulated
the immune system fine-tuned it if you
have a very aggressive immune system you
get things like
autoimmune illness allergies
if you have a very sleepy immune system
you're more prone to infections in
cancer but these peptides are
neuroimmuno modulators and that they
modulate the
activity fine tune the activity of the
immune system so suddenly i saw the
connection between mind body and spirit
but then i was also
actually intrigued by the fact that you
could have two patients who had the same
illness
saw the same doctor got the same
treatment and had completely different
outcomes one could survive one could die
and in between there was a wide range of
outcomes
so that led me to mind-body medicine
ultimately to integrative medicine so
when you first start looking at that
what was that sort of process of
discovery i know that you were a child
of the 60s i know that you did lsd
like how much of this is
showing you that there's something
beyond
traditional medicine and and how do you
begin to piece those pieces together
well i did lsd when i was in medical
school and um twice
i was not even 20 at that time
and
it did give me the insight
that our normal everyday experience or
what we call reality
is the hypnosis of social conditioning
that actually reality shifts as your
consciousness shifts
so to put it metaphorically
i had my first glimpse of the matrix
and i decided
that i wanted to not know what we know
but what is the source of knowing
okay it's not what you know you know
what you know these days
you can look it up go google it
so
it's not important what to know anybody
can find out anything about anything
these days you know i can look up how
many galaxies there are on the universe
or how does epigenetics work or how does
the brain function
that's not
the key to creativity
the key
to creativity and higher consciousness
is how do you know what you know
what is the source of knowing and
experience what is it that knows the
experience of the body what is it that
knows the experience of the mind
what is
it that knows the experience called the
color red and where is that experience
happening
a lot of people will tell you it's in
the brain but i can assure you there's
no colors in the brain there's no color
red when you look at the red color
there's no color here in the brain or if
you imagine the color or if you imagine
a beautiful sunset or if you imagine
what your experiences with your mother
or anybody emotions
the brain
only shows chemical activity that's
called the heart problem of
consciousness so what is the source
define that for us there's some sort of
leap that is
not understood between
um
how these there's some threshold event
of all of these atoms clustering in this
thing that we call a human and this
thing that we call a human brain but
there's still an unknown moment at which
we become conscious is that what you're
talking about no the heart problem of
consciousness is simply
stated in one sentence
how do
chemicals and atoms and neurochemistry
or neuroelectricity
produce this experience there's no
explanation for this
you're looking at me right now
all that's coming to your eyes are
invisible photons there's no red waves
coming to your eyes okay invisible
photons
they have no color they have no shape
they don't even have units of mass
okay so they're not
they don't have any dimensionality
the photons that you use you're exposed
to right now that are giving you the
experience of your own body
of me and this room
that's all that's coming to you is
electrical information
all that's going to your brain is an
electrical current it's called an action
potential
but you're experiencing this room you're
experiencing your own body you're
experiencing thoughts
in fact your experience seeing what we
call reality everyday reality
believe it or not no
no neuroscientist can tell you how that
happens they can look at what they call
neural correlates
a correlation is not a causation as we
know if the rooster crows in the morning
and the sun rises at the same time we
don't assume that the rooster caused the
sun to rise
okay but they are correlated so your
mind your brain and the physical world
are correlated experiences
in a deeper realm of existence which is
not in space or time okay so i want to
drill deeper on that so
what is the thing that drives you is it
to end human suffering what's that like
have you had to put that in a nutshell
yes
um the purpose of all healers
and ultimately of all physicians should
be
to alleviate suffering now we've done a
pretty good job with alleviating what we
call
suffering that occurs from acute illness
you break your leg you get an orthopedic
surgeon to fix it you get pneumonia you
take an antibiotic
so we've done a good job on what we call
the physicalist level
for acute illness but then there's
something called chronic illness
diabetes type 2
inflammation cancer heart disease
autoimmune illness
accelerated aging
propensity to infections
and we haven't done a good job there
because what we are realizing right now
that only five percent of
disease-related gene mutations
are fully penetrant which means they
guarantee the disease
a gene mutation is a genetic mistake
so good example angelina jolie had a
barakah gene
and she had a
mastectomy as a prevention double
mastectomy because that gene predicts
that she would have gotten breast cancer
for that by the way there are new
technologies that are emerging including
gene editing so
even now
that's possible not for cancer but for
things like sickle cell anemia you can
cut and paste the gene talk about crispr
yeah crispr you can cut a pastry gene
just like you do an email you read the
bar code
delete the gene and insert the healthy
one
it'll affect five percent of people
95 of gene mutations that cause illness
are related to lifestyle sleep managing
stress
and whether you meditate or not you
exercise or not
maybe you do yoga or not breathing
techniques the quality of your emotions
nutrition personal relationships social
interactions environment connection with
nature
influence
your gene activity we call it
epigenetics
so we've
beginning to do a good job there but
we're not there
let's say you got rid of all chronic
illness
and acute illness would humans
still suffer and the answer is yes
because unlike other
species
we have something
which is actually quite bizarre it's
called existential suffering
we wonder why we exist
we wonder
why we get old and can we
prevent that we wonder
why we get infirm and lose our memories
as we get old can we prevent that
but we also are afraid of death
okay
can we prevent that and the answer is
biological death is based on a false
premise
which is you are your biology
and you are your body and your mind
where i'm going with the heart problem
of consciousness is you're not your body
you're not your mind you're not the
experience of the world you're the
consciousness in which all this
experience occurs
to observe a thought is to know that
you're not a thought
to observe an emotion is to know that
you're not the emotion to observe the
body is to know that you're not this
bundle of sensations and perceptions
so who are you what is it that knows
a thought what is it that knows a
perception the color red
is there a color red anywhere in the
physical universe or is it just an
experience i guarantee you no scientist
can tell you that the color red exists
as a physical entity in the universe
it's an experience in human
consciousness
not in the consciousness of a bat
who doesn't see colors but experiences
the echo of ultrasound
so what is the color red to a bat i
think this is a good place to go back to
your lsd experience yeah so
looking at psychedelics and the impact
that they have on people's existential
dread over dying so i know they they've
done studies giving it to terminal
cancer patients and
from what i understand it has a pretty
radical shift in people's level of fear
as somebody who's never done
psychedelics what
what is that experience of the
dissolution of the ego like where is it
taking people what like is there a way
for you to sort of metaphorically
explain what's happening there
yes
when you realize that
everything you thought was real
is not
real when you also realize that who you
think you are
is not real
i am not deepak chopra with
this
body mind ego identity
that this is a very provisional identity
if i say i'm my body mind
you know i was once a fertilized ovum
then i was a zygote an embryo a baby a
toddler a young adult and now this and
this will disappear
but when you realize that all
your name your form and everything you
see
is provisional
two things happen to some people
they have immediate
what we could only metaphorically call
the dark knight of the soul they go into
a deep depression
because everything they thought was real
is no longer real including their own
name form body and mind
some people get so scared that they have
a bad trip
[Music]
some people cross that threshold and
discover nirvana
or
enlightenment and they say wow i thought
i was
i was squeezed into the volume of a body
in the span of a lifetime but i'm a
timeless being that can morph myself
into any experience including the human
experience which is
amazing
but the human experience is also that
which causes existential depression so
the causes of human suffering since you
brought it up are brought up in eastern
wisdom traditions as
number one you suffer because you don't
know who you are you confuse yourself
with your body mind experience number
two you grasp and cling
at experiences which are evanescent and
transitory and dream like
you say
what happened to your childhood it's
over what happened to yesterday it's
over what happened to five minutes ago
it's over what happens to these words by
the time you hear them they don't exist
so you know wittgenstein the german
philosopher said
we are asleep our life is a dream but
once in a while we wake up enough to
know that we are dreaming so what do you
wake up to when you cross this threshold
you wake up to your true self which
is
not body of mind but the awareness in
which that experience is happening so
grasping and clinging at a dream is the
second cause of human suffering the
third is
being afraid
of anything that's unpleasant pain
abandonment being treated by someone
not respectfully so that's you know
there's aversion to certain experiences
third cause of suffering fourth is
identifying which is related to it with
your ego identity
and fifth is the fear of death
now they're all connected
they're all the same
fear
and they are not knowing who you are
this is the biggest question
that humans or everybody should be
asking who am i what am i am i the
changing experience of this body which
is a perceptual activity
am i the experience of the changing mind
or the changing personality because you
don't have the same personality when you
were a kid or maybe even 10 years ago
what is it at the basis of this when you
start that reflective self-inquiry
ask yourself who am i what do i want
what is my purpose what am i grateful
for
going to the stillness of meditation you
have
what wisdom traditions have called
revelation
revealed truth
now you know that sounds very grand i
would say just call it insight
you know meditation mindfulness
awareness of body awareness of mind
awareness of mental space awareness of
the web of relationship awareness with
that which we call the universe
it leads you ultimately to the awareness
of awareness
and when you discover that
that's nirvana now are you familiar with
the term pan psychism yes so i had never
heard of that before and
it's a cop-out but interesting so i i
was going to ask if that is
so as i understand it pan psychism is
basically that consciousness itself is
um a force almost like gravity so it is
everywhere there is no
moment where enough atoms come together
that you have enough complexity that
consciousness arises that it is truly
fundamental and when i was reading
metahuman that's what i thought you were
saying i thought you were saying it is
this thing that just is um ever-present
so if that's not what you're saying no
it's not but i'm glad that scientists
are going in that direction including
some very
big and very important thinkers and
luminaries in both philosophy
and science are going in that direction
what they're saying is
just what you said that
what we call consciousness is organized
matter
and that wherever there is matter
there is consciousness from atom to
galaxy
okay so mind and mata go together from
atom to galaxy
that's pan psychism okay and it's got
very good
adherence proponents luminaries and
important minds saying that it's a
breakthrough because now you're not
saying consciousness is just in the
brain you're saying it pervades the
universe in the same way as gravity and
atoms and electrons
but i'm saying
actually there are no atoms there are no
electrons
gravity and force fields
are human constructs so matter is a
useful construct
i'm going beyond psychism into what is
called non-duality which means there's
only consciousness it's modifying itself
into sensations perceptions images
feelings and thoughts and we give names
to that we give we give a name to a
shape and a color and a sensation we
call it a cup
we call it a hand we call it the milky
way galaxy we call it atoms and force
fields very useful constructs otherwise
you wouldn't know how to navigate
everyday experience if i tell you i'll
meet you at the corner of 56th and
broadway
you assume that's real but we made up
that um that notation
just like we made up latitude and
longitude and greenwich mean time we
didn't say botswana meantime
we made up the galaxies we made up the
body we made up gravity and force wheels
by we i mean
a species of consciousness that is
called human
so now my question becomes if that is
the case and all that exists is
consciousness is there something behind
that like
why has consciousness given rise to
humans and do you see it going through
like an evolutionary thing
like how do we get here and maybe more
importantly why do we get here
i don't know if i can answer why other
than entertainment
but
but i can tell you what the
the thinking behind this is
is there anything behind consciousness
no
you can't get behind me that is base
level that's it yeah but that's called
pure consciousness okay
now everyday experience
is modified consciousness so right now
what you're experiencing is what we call
the waking state of consciousness
okay what do you mean by that
the awareness that i'm aware
[Music]
no the awareness that is experiencing a
physical body
and a physical world with eyes open
is called waking state of consciousness
okay okay
so awareness is modifying itself
every time you open your eyes into this
experience right
and you call it the physical world
now if you close your eyes
you have another state of consciousness
where you don't actually experience the
physical world
you experience sensations images
thoughts
emotions stories
it's like a dream as soon as you close
your eyes
you're experiencing you might call it
day dreaming but there's no difference
between a dream and what you dream at
night the physical world has disappeared
there's only a mental world
then you go deeper at night
even the mental world disappears in what
we call deep deep sleep
now that is the highest intelligence by
the way because in deep sleep there's
unconscious processing going on there's
creativity going on there are
correlations being made there are toxins
being removed there's a whole resetting
of your
memories and consolidation of that so in
deep sleep even though there is no
experience of a physical or a mental
world
it's a very intelligent
highly
highly correlated state
in which
unconscious processing is occurring
memories are being consolidated
imagination is
being refined etc even though you have
no conscious experience
so think of these three states
metaphorically like you would think of
water
becoming ice
as the physical world
okay
water as
water
fluid
dreamy
water as
vapor even more dreamy and fluctuating
and ambiguous
and
contradictory and
difficult to grasp
but if you want little bit beyond that
i'm speaking metaphorically you'd end up
with what is called the quantum vacuum
which is the fundamental ground of
existence according to science
okay
but you can do that subjectively you can
move from the physical world to the
dream world to the sleep world
and beyond to what is called fundamental
consciousness
which is the source of all knowing all
experience
in wisdom traditions it's called
undifferentiated consciousness how does
that differ from non-duality it is
non-dual okay it's all modes of knowing
all knowers and all things known
it is
fundamental ground of existence of the
total universe okay so nonduality is um
to put it really simplistically that
there is no subject object it's just all
one thing which i'm assuming you would
say is pure consciousness the subject
object
division is artificial
reality is one wholeness it includes all
subjects all objects
and all modes of knowing
what we have access to is a human mode
of knowing you know in my book metahuman
i talk about the butterfly the painted
lady
who smells the world through her antenna
okay tastes the world through her feet
sees the world with 30 000 lenses that
move like a kaleidoscope
okay here's the world through her wings
what is reality to that little species
some insects see the world 360 degrees
okay because they have these what we
call complex eyes
with multiple lenses
um
you can only see within a certain range
but there are insects
that can see 360 degrees
so what is reality reality
what we call reality what today's
science calls reality
comes under the heading of naive realism
einstein was a naive realist
and i'm not saying this in a derogatory
fashion it's it's it's a word in the
science of philosophy naive realism
means
that the physical world exists exactly
as perceived by the five human senses
now obviously that's not true other
species
experience the world
through different modes of sensory
perception
the second aspect of naive realism
is that the physical world as perceived
by the five human senses
would exist even if no one was observing
it well how do you prove that and
firstly it's naive because we know
that the world is more than
what is perceived by the five human
senses
so
this leads us to a solution actually
of the heart problem of consciousness
which is
get rid of the idea that the world is
physical what we call of the world as
physical even your physical body is a
perceptual activity
and that perceptual activity for you and
me is a human perceptual activity
through human consciousness not through
bad consciousness not through mosquito
consciousness
not through plant consciousness which
would
fit in with pan psychism but non-dualism
says
go beyond that
there is only one consciousness
that is differentiating you know
undifferentiated consciousness
differentiating into these different
species of consciousness
that form a matrix
of conscious beings that are
collectively projecting this universe
now i know that you said that you can't
answer the question why but do you ever
contemplate why
like why we would come into all these
manifestations why they would have such
differences i think if you say that
consciousness is fundamental
then it must have a desire
and the desire must be
i need to experience myself
and consciousness being undifferentiated
timeless spaceless
boundless
can only know itself through experience
so it modulates itself
into these different varieties of
experience almost infinite and we call
it the universe una verse one song
but in that one consciousness let's
reground this now so um you do some
really interesting personal practices so
i get it this is all an illusion but um
you do monastic retreats you shave your
head you shave your eyebrows you do a
week of stuff done yes so walk me
through what's the power in that
the power in that is to suddenly start
to become comfortable with questioning
your habitual certainties
if i ask you what is this you'd say it's
a cup right
well
if you were a baby you wouldn't know
this is a cup this is a shape this is a
color this is a form this is a sensation
this is
a taste
and it's noise
the rest is a story it's a human story
we created just like we created money or
wall street or nation states or colonial
empires
and we take that for reality
so but when you have time to be still
question your habitual certainties
you'll realize that actually we know
nothing
nothing everything we know is made up
it's a human construct
and once we are embedded in that human
concept we call it reality
we don't question
what is the source of this experience so
taking retreats practicing mindful
awareness of body of mind of mental
space of the web of relationship
the mystery of existence
it takes you slowly deeper
to your true self which is the
orchestrator
of everyday experience what's the
importance of silence
as rumi said god's language is silence
everything else is poor translation
so is it uh listening to the
subconscious so for instance part of the
reason that meditation has been so
powerful for me is and i get what you're
saying about correlation but as you said
it's very strongly correlated so
breathing from my diaphragm being quiet
takes me out of the sympathetic nervous
system and into the parasympathetic
allows me to reduce my stress you've
done a lot of research into that which
is really really fascinating and it
creates a quiet in my mind so that i can
tap into the subconscious while i'm
awake which has been very powerful makes
me feel far more creative i'm getting
far-flung connections that i wouldn't
otherwise get in my mind
so it's been very advantageous
is that the same experience for you with
silence or is there something i'm
missing no all of that is very important
because the moment you start going into
the direction of pure consciousness
you go also in the direction of
homeostasis which is self-regulation you
go in the direction of healing you
activate the parasympathetic nervous
system talk to me about some of the
science around there that that your
um your research has beared about
because it's pretty impressive we had uh
we tested people who were in a one-week
retreat
we call it this reduction of spirit
which is a nice name
and at the end of the week and before
the week we tested them for gene
activity and inflammation
and many other things
we found that genes that cause
self-regulation
and healing
went up some 17 fold over baseline
genes that cause
inflammation which is the common
background in chronic illness and
chronic inflammation is the background
genes that cause chronic inflammation
went down
the level of the enzyme telomerase which
influences how we age at a genetic level
telomere
length
went up significantly in some cases
now this can all be explained through
what we call epigenetics
and it's a revolution and many people
have replicated these findings now
um our study was done in collaboration
with scientists from duke and harvard
and ucsf and ucsd and scripps and so on
but other people are replicating finding
similar data if not exactly identical
data so this is a big revolution now for
people that don't know epigenetics can
you give them just a quick breakdown
yeah you're born with 25 000 genes from
your parents
you also have 2 million to 20 million
bacterial genes in your gut
these bacterial genes are called the
microbiome the human genes are the genes
you have
they interact with each other to produce
all the metabolites in your body and
produce what you call a biological
organism and maintain its health
epigenetics says that daily experience
influences the activity of your jeans so
you're born with a deck of cards but now
you know how to learn how to play the
deck of cards
so you can win the game of life
if you want to use that metaphor
and
so gene activity is influenced by the
things i mentioned sleep managing stress
exercise yoga breathing pranayama
introspection
mindful awareness emotions nutrition
connection with nature
we can change our
gene activities that
ability to change the activity of the
genes you can't change the cards you
were dealt with but you can change their
activity but you can also change your
microbiome by changing your diet so you
can actually
change much of your gene
not only expression
but the genetic information in your body
you can change the microbiome
the entire gene population by changing
your diet and following lifestyle
you can change the expression of your
genes
that's epigenetics epi means above and
epigenetics there's the sheath of
proteins above the genes that responds
to every experience you have mental
physical perceptual emotional all right
now walk us through some of the things
that you do from
going around with the begging bowl to
daily yoga like give us some
prescriptive stuff for
um winning at the game of life
okay well going around with the begging
bowl and all that was just to
experience myself without my
identity deepak chopra you shave your
eyebrows you walk with a begging bull
amongst other beggars um and you were
doing this in south korea right yeah in
korea yeah and you get uh
no sorry in thailand in northern
thailand but there are monasteries in
south korea like that too
so it brings you to who am i without my
pr
who am i without this identity
that is the purpose of some of these
retreats
but
of course that's once in a while i take
a week of silence also once a year
but here's what i do every day i start
my day
with four questions who am i
what do i want
who wants to know
what is my purpose and what am i
grateful for
then i go into about a two-hour
meditation very early in life which is
going to stillness
now do you answer those questions or
that's what the meditation is for that's
what the major you live the questions
consciousness moves you into the answers
because consciousness is infinite
and there's infinite correlations you
don't have to worry about the answers
you know it's an ancient thing ask and
you shall receive
the unexamined life is not worth living
so you just practice that every day then
i do about one and a half hours to two
hours of
stillness meditation it includes mindful
awareness of body mind and all that
then i do yoga so it takes me about
three hours to do my morning routine i
normally
don't start my day till 11.
today is an exception for you thank you
and then i normally don't work after
five other than when i'm giving a talk
or on a tour
or doing media but normally eleven to
five
and on weekends i write and
reflect and i
enjoy
my life
so what are you doing if you're working
from 11 to five one what is work and
then two when you're enjoying your life
what does that look like
when i'm in new york i walk the streets
and i
taste and smell
and experience the colors and flavors
of
every country by walking on broadway
i can go through korea town india town
china town
it little italy
little spain little portugal
and savor
the sensuality of the experience
and
i spend a lot of time doing that
by work i actually don't have any work
right now other than i write books and
give speeches
which is how i learn
myself you know
i'm whatever i'm struggling with and
trying to solve
i write it down and then you know if i
see some clarity then i publish it
that's work but it's i don't think of it
as work i think of it as play now you've
said that you no longer think about
aging
you think that the pursuit of that whole
line of inquiry is a mistake what did
you mean by that
no i
don't
not think of aging i'm 73 my next
chapter is death so
you know
so i think about aging
i'm not bamboozled by the construct
okay because i don't think
consciousness
being
formless
and infinite is subject to either birth
or death this is a vacation we are
having
in on planet earth right now and so
might as well enjoy it
but death is not the end of
consciousness it's the end of a certain
storyline in consciousness
a certain interpretation
of perceptions images feelings and
thoughts and the storyline
is of course the conditioned mind as
soon as you're born you say oh you're
indian you're male you come from a
wealthy or poor family
this is your religion
and now you're bamboozled
from your true self into this
provisional identity so i don't
it's not that i don't think about that i
ask myself what is beyond my provisional
identity
and i dwell in that and that has a very
interesting
outcome
which is the outcome in every spiritual
tradition there are only three things
that happen by the way in a religious
or traditional experience one is
transcendence you know
that you are not
an entity in space and time that your
true self is formless infinite unbounded
borderless unfettered free
consciousness number one number two you
have the emergence of what
usually are referred to as platonic
truths
goodness beauty harmony love compassion
joy equanimity
and number three loss of the fear of
death there's nothing more important
than having those three experiences and
they've been part of every wisdom
tradition for thousands of years talk to
me about love it's interesting for
somebody that started with
neurochemistry who could probably give
me a very detailed breakdown of the
neurochemicals involved with love it of
course oxytocin and serotonin
but
those are models again they are
constructs
love is not a sentiment
love is not an emotion love is the
ultimate truth
at the heart of creation
which is unity consciousness one
consciousness differentiating into
infinite modes of experience infinite
noise infinite modes of knowing infinite
phenomena known all generated within the
oneself just like when you were just a
fertilized ovum you were one step cell
stem cell pluripotential cell it became
eyes it became nose it became
fingernails it became
heart it became brain so that one cell
differentiated into all these
different cells each with its own
modality of experience
like that the one mind the one
consciousness
differentiates itself
into what we call the universe with
every species of consciousness knowing
the universe in its own unique way
because ultimately there's no universe
it's another construct when you're
meditating are you seeing images so love
love is the ultimate truth
but
what is that like that
help help me differentiate between
consciousness being sort of the floor
and love being the floor are they one
and the same like pure love pure
consciousness pure knowing pure
creativity
are the same thing
interesting because i think of and look
i get it this is me trapped in sort of
the human experience but i think of love
as a as a molecule of emotion i think of
it as an experience it's hard for me to
wrap my head around
it's the source of those molecules
of well molecules of emotion are human
constructs but it is the source of the
feeling that you get so i think of my
mother right now who's long gone
and as soon as i think the word mother i
see her image
and it's not in my brain there's only
chemistry in my brain the image is in my
consciousness as soon as i think of her
actually i can hear her voice
there's no sound in my brain but i can
hear her voice in my consciousness as
soon as i think of her i feel an emotion
that maybe there's oxytocin in my brain
but i'm not experiencing oxytocin i'm
feeling this immense emotion of joy just
by thinking of her i can even smell her
skin
when i was a baby
where did all this come from just by
thinking of the word mother okay the
word mother in pure consciousness
created this whole
gestalt of experiences
i call this qualia entanglement instead
of quantum entanglement qualia means
quality of experience sensations images
perceptions feelings thoughts ultimately
that's all there is
qualia or qualities of experience we
raiify them we objectify them and we
call them molecules
what's your mom like
she was the most amazing storyteller
and every day she would tell us a
magnificent story
before we went to bed
but she would stop at what is called
a
cliffhanger and then she'd say tomorrow
i want you to end this story for me
make sure it's a love story with a happy
ending
that's interesting and that's what
influenced my entire life i decided that
all stories are provisional and the best
stories are love stories
that's really interesting is that
something that you continued with your
kids or is that something that no no i
continued it with my kids for sure
that's interesting
do you think that that brings an
awareness to storytelling in and of
itself or is it most powerful because it
primes you to focus on something
beautiful
it actually does all of the above you
know
humans are different in that we are
storytellers
so they
we uh
until about 30 40 000 years ago when we
had rudimentary language there were
eight different types of humans some
maybe more
we are homo sapiens which means the wise
ones we gave ourselves that name
but there's homo erectus hormone
neanderthals homophlorous
on and on
they all had a rudimentary language for
danger calls mating calls
uh food
but then we
created a language for telling stories
and we decimated every other species
because with stories we created money we
created empires we created colonial
states we created wall street we created
technology we created cyber hacking and
whatever else mechanized debt this all
the result of our ability to take raw
experience which is perceptions
and make a story out of it
so once you realize that you also
realize that all stories are provisional
you're not your stories you're the the
author of the stories and that includes
all stories including the story
that you are a biological
organism
in a theater of space-time and causality
and this is real that's a story
why is it so important to tell yourself
a story about gratitude i know you tell
people to focus on that gratitude opens
the door to abundance consciousness
when i'm feeling grateful for what i
already have i feel fulfilled
and joyful
and if you have gratitude you can't
experience hostility at the same time
what do you think the future of medicine
is
i think the future of medicine is
self-regulation
what do you mean
meditating
and yoga and practices that
stimulate the vegas nerve and it's
create mind-body coordination so
meditation
yoga
tai chi chi gong
martial arts
knowing how to regulate your mind and
body as one unit
but in addition to that
we are
artificial intelligence
and the most amazing technology that can
enhance that experience of
self-regulation there's already data
that you can help children with autism
through vr
by
changing their facial expressions and
giving them feedback to
you know what an emotional
wholeness could be or you can change the
image an anorexic person has when they
look at a mirror
or you can get rid of a phobia through
vr or burns if somebody has burns you ex
create an environment where they
experience cold you're in snow and so on
all through vr
it's more effective than any burn
treatment and so i see as we create more
excursions
into ai i have a ai version of myself
already that i talk to
so i can continue what i'm doing after
i'm dead
and
then i also very engaged in vr
and immersive
experiences in virtual reality because i
believe that we are already in a virtual
reality and we can modify it through
extending virtual reality so i think the
future of medicine is the most
amazing technology with the most amazing
understanding of consciousness
that's incredible
where can people find your
massive library of books
i think better to go to
deepak chopra.com or
just go online and you can find my
library i do have a library called
chopra library
and if you want to find it it's also
called
i s h a r
online.org
and this is the most comprehensive
library
on everything to do with integrative
studies or integrative medicine or
integrative cultures
it's i would say there's nothing like
this it's the wikipedia of integrative
medicine
it's called the chopra library it
doesn't have just my work it has the
work of everybody
in the field of
integrative studies whether they're
scientists philosophers humanitarians
or
just people like me who shoot the breeze
what's the impact that you want to have
on the world
i just want people to say there was this
guy he's gone now let's pick up from
where he left and see how we can
continue this exploration right actually
you know the journey has no ending
the point of arrival is always now
i like that
all right guys it is a vast world that
this man creates i won't even say
inhabits that he creates
he's written on so many topics and has
extended this notion of non-duality to
so many people and really helped reach
countless lives and get people to
think in new ways you can think of him
as a human dose of lsd so i highly
encourage you guys to check it out to
change your consciousness um and yeah
hopefully end human suffering if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
[Applause]
they are not suffering life they think
they are suffering life they are not
suffering life
they are suffering the two most
fantastic faculties that human beings
alone have a vivid sense of memory and a
fantastic sense of imagination